what a miracle life is how lucky we are
to exist on this planet if even for a
short time
and i'll tell you what makes me feel
better about wasting that time and
probably dying alone
regularly consuming gigantic quantities
of
chocolate yes delicious eh but how does
chocolate end up in your terribly clever
brain as the taste of chocolate
well your tongue and your schnoz of
course your tongue is covered in several
thousand taste buds made up of about 50
gustatory receptor cells each
it's fairly accepted there are five
building blocks of taste sweet
sour salty bitter and umami umami
is basically the taste of savory stuff
green tea and shiitake mushrooms are
good examples if you're curious
that thing about different tongue
sections tasting different flavors isn't
true by the way but
heiho now for taste you'll need your
nose too your nose is full of cells
called olfactory sensory neurons quite
high up
different smells play these cells like
molecular keys on a piano
anyway the information about the taste
and smell of the chocolate from your
excellent beak and mouth waggler get
transmitted electrically to your brain
specifically the gustatory and olfactory
cortex and that's a great olfactory
cortex you have there by the way
and that information ends up somehow
turning into the perception of the taste
of chocolate
easy right okay but you don't see
chemical information about chocolate
scrolling across your eyes like the
terminator
you experience it as a sensation and
that is the rub
because we don't know yet how mata how
chemistry how sugar
and cocoa end up going from electrical
signals in your brain to the taste of
chocolate
the experience of chocolate in your mind
this is called the hard problem of
consciousness
and if you don't mind i would like to
convince you today that it is the
greatest mystery
in history the sensations of experience
are called
qualia qualia are the feels of something
how an experience tastes or looks or
sounds
take a sunset if you will in reality all
we're really seeing is wavelengths of
the electromagnetic spectrum
in this case around 600 nanometers if
we're being fancy schmancy
but your eyes turn those wavelengths
into information and your brain turns
that information
into yellow and orange into experience
and the colors themselves as you see
them are the qualia
the orangeness of orange it's the same
with the hotness of heat
the sweetness of chocolate the nausea of
a tummy ache the elements of
experience imagine you were talking to
someone who can't see color
how would you describe the color orange
to them now you might say
it's like red but with more yellow in it
but that's not gonna work silly
they don't know what the experiences of
red and yellow are
have you ever chomped on some asparagus
then gone to pee a little while later
and almost passed out from the
disgusting smell
if you haven't that's because you don't
have the gene or genes to detect
asparagus metabolites
and you are one lucky papa because the
smell is [ __ ]
vile as far as we know only about half
the world population
are lucky enough to have the genetics to
detect it the funny thing is
if you don't have the genetics you'll
never know what it's like
you could train as a scientist and
specialize in the asparagus piss effect
and become the world's leading authority
on it bit weird
but you do you you could know everything
academically there was to know about the
asparagus piss effect
everything accepts the disgusting smell
itself everything except the qualia
and the qualia are everything if you've
never seen a certain color if you've
never tasted a particular flavor
hell if you've never been in love you
can read 10 000 eloquent descriptions of
whatever but that will never be the
qualia
description and experience live in two
separate universes
in reality of course there is no such
thing as asparagus piss or the color
orange or the sound of a kettle boiling
or the coldness of snow
and if somehow we could experience
objective reality directly
whatever that [ __ ] means all you
would find in the real world outside of
our heads
is chemical compounds and wavelengths of
em radiation
and vibrations in the air and relatively
less energetic atoms
there is no orange it is just one of the
many millions of veils our brains drape
over reality to understand reality
and if the brain is an electrochemical
computer if it's just
meat how does it turn electricity into
experience
into the sweetness of chocolate into the
orange of a sunset
or from asparagus into the fine bouquet
of satan's taint
the hard problem of consciousness how
does the brain create
qualia now there are the so-called easy
problems of consciousness
stuff like how is it that you that is
your brain can shift your focus of
attention between stuff
or how do you categorize information
these are a bit like the problem of how
we'll get humans to mars or something
they're tricky problems but they're
technically feasible with enough cocaine
coffee
scientists will probably crack them one
day the reason why the hard problem of
consciousness is often considered the
big boy of questions
the hard problem is because as it stands
today we don't even have the beginning
of the beginning of a sensible answer to
it
how does this turn this into this how
does electricity get transformed into
colors and sounds and experience
and as much as us clever 21st century
carbon units know about the furniture of
reality
about the curvature of space-time and
the unpalatable presentation of a
baboon's arse
nothing yet in our now vast libraries of
the qualities of the natural world
have much to say about how meat makes a
mind
despite the fact that we're made up of
elements you'll find everywhere else in
the universe
hydrogen carbon nitrogen oxygen
accounting for 99 of our bodies
something about the way those elements
are put together turns into something
that knows it's made of matter in the
first place
and has experiences we're made of
universe but we actually know we're
universe
we are food that can enjoy food and yet
the hard problem
remains now what we're getting very good
at doing recently
is finding correlations between what
your brain and body is doing
physical you and what your mind is doing
at the same time
the wibbly consciousness [ __ ] we know
that the hormone cortisol correlates
very closely with anxiety
we know that an altered gamma brainwave
pattern correlates very closely with
epilepsy and several mood disorders
or vice versa we know if you're enjoying
downton abbey erotic fan fiction
you'll probably be using your cerebrum
for processing the text and so on
we have a huge map of what brain area
and biological process
correlates with which mental state but
that doesn't tell us what the mechanisms
of qualia and consciousness are yet
any more than if you asked how voting
works in the uk and someone just showed
you a picture of number 10 downing
street
that's where that's not how incidentally
that little feline outside is called
larry
he is the current chief mouser to the
cabinet office that's not me being
quirky
it's true and he's a very good boy
alright the brain is a huge
unbelievably complicated network of
inputs and outputs
it can do graphics and audio and
parallel processing and storage
the thing is clearly a computer of sorts
but computation
can't be the end of the story because
computers are great at manipulating
information like us
but as far as we know computers don't
experience information like
us something is in this gap turning meat
into experiences
if indeed we are just meat there are a
million theories as to what that process
is of course
maybe consciousness is a fundamental
property of matter distributed across
the entire universe and brains focus it
somehow
maybe it's just what happens when you
integrate enough information in the
right way
or maybe it's a fancy illusion and what
it feels like to be you
is just the side quest your brain is
playing after it's already decided what
it's going to do anyway
but one thing is for sure every proposal
we have so far for qualia generation and
consciousness
requires the kind of explosive leap one
only experiences the morning after
eating california reaper peppers
elaborate as they are every explanation
so far is a physical description of
matter but what we want to know is how
mata becomes experience
we must propel ourselves off the toilet
of the brain mind correlation
towards the imodium of a final theory of
consciousness
we must collapse the duality of the
subjective and objective worlds
once and for all and talking of which
gosh
humans love dualities don't we good
versus evil wads of paper versus le
washi bumble
mind versus body
the mind body problem is about as angry
as you can make a philosopher
how can we explain what it's like to be
a mind if minds are made out of
universally dead
stuff so in a condescending pattern head
fashion the battle boils down to
materialism
versus non-materialism firstly the
argument from materialism then
materialism is basically the idea that
everything in the universe from galaxies
to the weather
to little hourly wows spring from
physics from mata
from quantum fields not wibbly extra
physical stuff
the heart is a machine there's no
wizards in your spleen as weird as it
may be
why can't consciousness be a biological
process like digestion or cell division
humans have a bit of a tendency for
claiming stuff we don't understand
is supernatural well it turns out the
sun isn't pulled up by a chariot
germ theory was a lot more of a powerful
explanation for disease than getting
cursed
yes consciousness is super weird it's
unlike any other phenomenon we've
discovered so far and we are in quite
the pickle trying to explain it
but we've been in pickles before the
origin of species the formation of
galaxies
the answer is almost impossible to
imagine until someone explains it
scientifically
and then it's so obvious we can't
believe we didn't get it earlier
give science and philosophy some time
with consciousness we've done it before
we'll [ __ ] do it again then there is
the non-materialist response to that and
it sometimes goes
a little like this yes
science has been super powerful in
explaining the world around us
but hang on there dick pump everything
explained so far has been dead stuff
you can explain stars mechanistically
because they are mechanistic how
using our current picture of matter are
you going to jump from interactions and
physical qualities
to matter that knows its matter that
feels like a mind that has experiences
this isn't a gap because we don't have a
materialist theory yet it's a gap
because materialism can't account for it
even if you had a perfect map of
correlations between what the brain is
doing and how the person with the brain
feels
even if you had a special recipe that
goes take some neural oscillations
add in x amount of integrated
information sprinkle in some quantum
coherency
do a [ __ ] backflip and then brains
will be conscious
isn't that still just a description
rather than an explanation again
anyway that's a pretty [ __ ] caricature
of the materialist versus
non-materialist debate as it stands
today
if i've mischaracterized your position
please accept this vintage depiction of
a pomeranian
i hope we can still be friends and on
top of that you might reasonably wonder
why anyone should even give a [ __ ] about
the hard problem of consciousness
or how consciousness arises anyway we
are conscious we can see sunsets
shut up but to that i would reply no
you yes we might be far off cracking
this thing
but if we crack it if we finally set up
a sturdy bridge between descriptions of
physical states and mental states
if we have a working theory of the
relationship between the brain and the
conscious mind
it won't just herald in a shower of
nobel prizes it will mean we can start
addressing
actual endgame meaning of life questions
we will have codified answers to the
existential quandaries dating back to
the ancients
like do we actually have free will and
is consciousness baked into matter or is
it an emergent phenomenon
and how do mothers turn food into
thinking conscious people in their
tummies
and could we one day make other stuff
conscious like machines or new
artificially organized states of matter
and how did evolution create conscious
animals anyway was it advantageous
somehow
and okay why was it how is it better
than just evolving biological robots
and for that matter how conscious are
our animal mates and just what
is a thought how are we thinking or
feeling for that matter how the hell are
we collecting
binding and experiencing sensory
information from the dead mathematical
world beyond
our minds and translating that into
chocolate and rakia and cold and rough
and misery and curiosity and
indifference and satisfaction and
ambivalence and
being just the feeling of being a being
what is qualia how is experience even
possible
why the [ __ ] is orange
i'm going out for the day and don't
smoke all my weed again
there's a weird feeling you get
sometimes if you're into all this
consciousness stuff
because you can get knee deep in the
isms and the mud slinging and
philosophers bullshitting each other
and you suddenly step back and think oh
my god this isn't some highfaluting
academic problem the mystery is in me
the mystery is me right now at the
center of our heads is the point of
contention of millennia of debate
conscious experience it is the greatest
mystery
and if the greatest mystery of all time
was hiding anywhere else but inside our
own heads
we'd never stop [ __ ] talking about it
but because it's so close
because it's us it barely gets mentioned
outside of academia
every sense coming in every color every
sound every taste
the mystery is yelling at us the whole
time how is experience possible
how am i possible what is inside me
doing all of this
and maybe the same goes for mammals for
marine life
god knows who else a bunch of non-human
animals
seem to have internal lives of some kind
don't doggos go mental when we come home
because they're actually feeling happy
to see us
didn't the killer whale j35 carry her
dead daughter's body
for a thousand miles refusing to let her
fall to the ocean floor
not out of some robotic inbuilt reflex
but because
she was sad because she was grieving
beyond narrative
beyond nations beyond history possibly
even beyond species in some cases
there is a common insane experience
being a living thing
in a cosmos of apparently dead things
being a thing that doesn't just process
information but feels and hopes and
regrets and hate and longs and dreads
the never-ending chatter of ourselves
talking to ourselves
who am i i wonder how mum's doing i'm
hungry i'm thirsty
should i be married by now i think the
milk is off do you still love me
i still love you how will i die when
will i be happy i should phone the post
office i should buy more toilet roll i
should worry less i should worry more
will anything ever make sense we don't
know how the consciousness trick is done
yet
and to be honest maybe we never will but
even then
even if we never do the mystery is here
and it's gorgeous
and it's everywhere as gk chesterton put
it
but now a great thing in the street
seems any human nod
where shift in strange democracy the
million masks of
god it is not a pleasant condition to
endure living in an age when we know
more about the heavens than we do the
mechanisms of our own heads
personally some days i find it [ __ ]
horrifying but things
are changing inside the sciences today
it's finally becoming fashionable to
study consciousness
the science of how we experience is just
getting going now
science is coming home from its mad
flight in the stars
back down the telescope to ask about the
mind looking up the telescope
we're living at the birth of a theory of
us and i will bet you my cash
on this in the miraculous event we
actually get through this teenage phase
in our development
we might stand the chance of maturing
into an adult species
we might live one day in a time of
perfect explanations and finished
science
when most things have been measured and
explained when the mechanisms of
consciousness and experience are as well
understood as the dynamics of flight are
today
but i will also bet you my cat that
there are eyes in that enlightened time
looking back longingly wishing they
could know what it was like
for us today to have lived in the great
age of mysteries
to have looked around and seen question
marks everywhere and found the courage
in spite of the dreadful uncertainties
in spite of not knowing how our souls
work to still carry on and still
be at least half decent back when humans
were clueless about their own mental
mechanisms
back in the quiet ignorance of the 21st
century in the days of wild unknowing
when all you needed to do to remind
yourself of how gorgeously weird the
world is
was to remember that for all we could
explain sound
we had no idea how it became music in
our minds
and to remember that for all we could
explain light we had no idea how it
became color
when all that was required to remember
just how close the unknown is to us
was to look up to the horizon around
evening and to know
that for all the mysteries of the sky
and beyond the sky
for all the mysteries of our sun and the
dust she came from
on any given evening below any given
sunset
as the heavens look down on us clearly
the real mystery all along
was looking back up at the heavens
[ __ ] out that ending is too
pretentious even for me bogeys
willies etc don't forget to brush your
teeth being alive is weird
until next time then